Upgrade guide for MariaDB 10.6 (#4360)
owncloud/docs: modules/admin_manual/pages/maintenance/upgrading/database_upgrade.adoc

When planning to upgrade to MariaDB 10.6, some prerequisites have to be met and upgrade steps have to be taken. 

This is because MariaDB 10.6 has changed that _tables that are of the COMPRESSED row format are read-only by default_. For more information see the {compressed-row-format-url}[InnoDB COMPRESSED Row Format] document.

NOTE: This process only needs to be carried out once.

=== Prerequisites

. You must have upgraded your ownCloud installation to version 10.9 or above. To do so, follow the
xref:maintenance/upgrading/manual_upgrade.adoc[Manual ownCloud Upgrade] guide.

. Backup your ownCloud installation, especially the database. To do so, follow the
xref:maintenance/backup_and_restore/backup.adoc[Backing up ownCloud] guide.

. When running a MariaDB release lower than 10.5, you have to upgrade step-by-step for each minor release up to 10.5.x. Follow the respective {upgrade-mariadb-url}[Upgrading MariaDB] guide.
+
[WARNING]
====
You must not skip minor releases of MariaDB when upgrading like from 10.3 -> 10.5, you have to upgrade to each minor version in between step by step.
====
+
Have a backup of you database to rollback in case of issues.

. Prevent browser access +

> Depending on your setup, prevent accessing users your ownCloud instance like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your setup, prevent users accessing your ownCloud instance by:
```

Reviewer: Maybe setting maintenance mode is enough?
When maintenance mode is on, users of the webUI should be informed if/when they try to login, and clients should "understand" that the server is in maintenance mode, and stop trying to sync files. True?

Author: good point, will have a deeper thought on that...

Author: fixed, see commit

= Database Upgrade
:toc: right
:upgrade-mariadb-url: https://mariadb.com/kb/en/upgrading/
:compressed-row-format-url: https://mariadb.com/kb/en/innodb-compressed-row-format/#read-only

== Introduction

Usually, when upgrading a database, follow the guides the vendor provides. You may also take a look at the xref:installation/manual_installation/manual_installation.adoc#install-a-database[Install a Database] section for general notes.

This document supports an upgrade in case there are prerequisites and/or special steps to be taken to upgrade to a particular database version.

== Upgrading to MariaDB 10.6

> ownCloud runs fine when using a MariaDB version lower than 10.6. You can upgrade ownCloud as usual without special considerations to the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ownCloud runs fine when using a MariaDB version lower than 10.6. You can upgrade ownCloud as usual without special considerations regarding the database.
```

When planning to upgrade to MariaDB 10.6, some prerequisites have to be met and upgrade steps have to be taken. 

> This is because MariaDB 10.6 has changed that _tables that are of the COMPRESSED row format are read-only by default_. For more information see the {compressed-row-format-url}[InnoDB COMPRESSED Row Format] document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is mostly due to the fact that, unlike before, in MariaDB 10.6 _tables of the COMPRESSED row format are read-only by default_. For more information see the {compressed-row-format-url}[InnoDB COMPRESSED Row Format] document.
```

NOTE: This process only needs to be carried out once.

=== Prerequisites

. You must have upgraded your ownCloud installation to version 10.9 or above. To do so, follow the
xref:maintenance/upgrading/manual_upgrade.adoc[Manual ownCloud Upgrade] guide.

. Backup your ownCloud installation, especially the database. To do so, follow the
xref:maintenance/backup_and_restore/backup.adoc[Backing up ownCloud] guide.

. When running a MariaDB release lower than 10.5, you have to upgrade step-by-step for each minor release up to 10.5.x. Follow the respective {upgrade-mariadb-url}[Upgrading MariaDB] guide.
+
[WARNING]
====
You must not skip minor releases of MariaDB when upgrading like from 10.3 -> 10.5, you have to upgrade to each minor version in between step by step.
====
+
Have a backup of your database to rollback in case of issues.

=== Upgrade Steps

. Set ownCloud in maintenance mode
+
[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} maintenance:mode --on
----

. Prevent browser access +
+

> Stop your webserver to prevent users trying to access ownCloud via the web. As an alternative, you can stop serving the virtual host for ownCloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stop your web server to prevent users from trying to access ownCloud via the web. As an alternative, you can stop serving the virtual host for ownCloud.
```

+
[source,console]
----
# Stop the web server
sudo service apache2 stop
----

. Run an occ command to prepare the database for the upgrade
+
[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} db:restore-default-row-format
----

. Upgrade MariaDB to version 10.6.x
+

> Follow the respective {upgrade-mariadb-url}[Upgrading MariaDB] guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the instructions in the {upgrade-mariadb-url}[Upgrading MariaDB] guide.
```

> . Set ownCloud back into normal operation mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Set ownCloud back to normal operation mode:
```

+
[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} maintenance:mode --off
----

. Enable browser access +

> Start your web server, or alternatively re-enable the virtual host serving ownCloud:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start your web server, Alternatively, enable the virtual host serving ownCloud again:
```
